.TH reboot 8 2009-07-09 "Upstart"
.\"
.SH NAME
reboot, halt, poweroff \- reboot or stop the system
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBreboot\fR [\fIOPTION\fR]...

\fBhalt\fR [\fIOPTION\fR]...

\fBpoweroff\fR [\fIOPTION\fR]...
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
These programs allow a system administrator to
.BR reboot ", " halt " or " poweroff
the system.

When called with
.I --force
or when in runlevel
.B 0
or
.BR 6 ,
this tool invokes the
.BR reboot (2)
system call itself and directly reboots the system.  Otherwise this
simply invokes the
.BR shutdown (8)
tool with the appropriate arguments.

Before invoking
.BR reboot (2),
a shutdown time record is first written to
.I /var/log/wtmp
.\"
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -f ", " --force
Does not invoke
.BR shutdown (8)
and instead performs the actual action you would expect from the name.
.\"
.TP
.BR -p ", " --poweroff
Instructs the
.B halt
command to instead behave as
.BR poweroff .
.\"
.TP
.BR -w ", " --wtmp-only
Does not call
.BR shutdown(8)
or the
.BR reboot(2)
system call and instead only writes the shutdown record to
.I /var/log/wtmp
.\"
.TP
.B --verbose
Outputs slightly more verbose messages when rebooting, useful for debugging
problems with shutdown.
.\"
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUNLEVEL
.B reboot
will read the current runlevel from this environment variable if set in
preference to reading from
.I /var/run/utmp
.\"
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/run/utmp
Where the current runlevel will be read from; this file will also be updated
with the runlevel record being replaced by a shutdown time record.
.\"
.TP
.I /var/log/wtmp
A new runlevel record for the shutdown time will be appended to this file.
.\"
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Scott James Remnant
.RB < scott@netsplit.com >
.\"
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs at
.RB < https://launchpad.net/upstart/+bugs >
.\"
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2009 Canonical Ltd.
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR shutdown (8)
.BR telinit (8)
.BR runlevel (8)
