.TH init 8 2010-02-04 "Upstart"
.\"
.SH NAME
init \- Upstart process management daemon
.\"
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B init
.RI [ OPTION ]...
.\"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B init
is the parent of all processes on the system, it is executed by the kernel
and is responsible for starting all other processes; it is the parent of
all processes whose natural parents have died and it is responsible for
reaping those when they die.

Processes managed by
.B init
are known as jobs and are defined by files in the
.I /etc/init
directory.  See
.BR init (5)
for more details on configuring Upstart.
.\"
.SS Events
.BR init (8)
is an event-based init daemon.  This means that jobs will be automatically
started and stopped by changes that occur to the system state, including
as a result of jobs starting and stopping.

This is different to dependency-based init daemons which start a specified
set of goal jobs, and resolve the order in which they should be started and
other jobs required by iterating their dependencies.

For more information on starting and stopping jobs, as well as emitting
events that will automatically start and stop jobs, see the manual page for
the
.BR initctl (8)
tool.

The primary event is the
.BR startup (7)
event, emitted when the daemon has finished loading its configuration.
Other useful events are the
.BR starting (7),
.BR started (7),
.BR stopping (7)
and
.BR stopped (7)
events emitted as jobs change state.
.\"
.SS System V compatibility
The Upstart
.BR init (8)
daemon does not keep track of runlevels itself, instead they are implemented
entirely by its userspace tools.  The event emitted to signify a change
of runlevel is the
.BR runlevel (7)
event.  For more information see its manual page.
.\"
.SH OPTIONS
Options are passed to
.BR init (8)
by placing them on the kernel command-line.
.\"
.TP
.B --verbose
Outputs verbose messages about job state changes and event emissions to the
system console or log, useful for debugging boot.
.\"
.SH NOTES
.B init
is not normally executed by a user process, and expects to have a process
id of 1.  If this is not the case, it will actually execute
.BR telinit (8)
and pass all arguments to that.  See that manual page for further details.
.\"
.SH FILES
.\"
.I /etc/init.conf

.I /etc/init/*.conf
.\"
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Scott James Remnant
.RB < scott@netsplit.com >
.\"
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs at
.RB < https://launchpad.net/upstart/+bugs >
.\"
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2010 Canonical Ltd.
.br
This is free software; see the source for copying conditions.  There is NO
warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR init (5)
.BR initctl (8)
.BR telinit (8)
.BR runlevel (7)
.BR startup (7)
.BR starting (7)
.BR started (7)
.BR stopping (7)
.BR stopped (7)
